---
layout: post
author: ollie
heading: Stop Using the Smallest Brush you can find
title: Stop Using the Smallest Brush you can find
categories: Editorial
---

TLDR: Replace you brushes regularly, just make sure it has a good tip!

I've had this conversation with a few people lately - it turns out launching a blog is a great way to discover how many people you know get involved in painting! So I thought it might be good to have a post talking about some things I have discovered since taking the leap and moving away from Games Workshop brushes. This isn't a review per-say, but should hopefully demystify some of effects such a change might have. This post isn't so much a what brush you should use, but why it might be worth making an upgrade.

## The Comfort Zone
So to be clear, I am in no way bashing the Games Workshop brushes - they are very easily available, reasonably priced and are excellent as work horse brushes. Importantly, because they are accessible, they are very easy to get your hands on and inspect before you actually buy them, so you can know whether it is the right size for what you are looking for. Not to mention the stroke of marketing genius that is GW outlining in their tutorials which brushes are used for each step - it makes it so easy to see the sort of tasks you might expect a brush to be suitable for.

Up until about a month ago, I exclusively used GW brushes, and the only new brush I had bought in the last few years was the XS artificer for all that crisp 'Eavy Metal-style edge highlighting I was doing. I recently discovered that it is in fact a very pervasive myth that to do any crisp detail, you need the smallest brush you can get your hands on. But boy was I wrong.

## The New Kids in my Toolbox
Since the Star Wars busts took me deep into unknown territory, I thought it was important to be able to assess the outcome based on my skill alone, so I could see what could need improving, what went well etc. I didn't want an excuse to blame my tools, so spent some money on a Raphael 404 size 1. Over Christmas I also thought I would treat myself and bought the Artis Opus brush set too.

The main reason I chose the Raphael 404 is that from what I was aware, it was slightly bigger than size 1s in most other brush brands, so I felt that might be helpful for getting those larger blends. Sure, I could have just gone for a sixe 2 in other brands, but I still wanted to be able to use the brush on normal minis in case I didn't come back to doing busts again for a while.

As I mentioned above, I hadn't bought a new brush for a while, and had certainly never bought a non-GW one before so i was interested to see what all the hype was about. Suffice to say I was not disappointed.

## Replace your damn brushes
Perhaps something that is probably obvious to most people, but the importance of which certainly hadn't dawned on me, is that no matter how well you look after your brush, it will eventually need replacing. The problem on my end is that because of University and jobs and mving around a lot, I had long periods where I hadn't painted, and so forgot what it was like to paint with a new brush. I certainly hadn't gauged how much my old brushes had worn out because they still stayed together, formed a reasonable point and weren't *too* dirty. I had just assumed that any problems were just the nature of GW brushes and not the actual age and wear. To put things into context, the standard brush I had been using up until now was the 'Eavy Metal standard brush that was released in their brush set in 2011. I've since realise that regular use brushes should probably be replaced every year if not more depending on how much you are doing.

Getting new brushes makes you realise how mush easier it is to do smaller detail work even with a larger brush, because crucially - new brushes have good points!

## Smallest =/= Best
This leads me onto my next point - you don't need the smallest, finest brush available to do all your edge highlighting. Smaller brushes wear out faster - 1 hair leaving a point in a brush with 10 hairs is going to cause much more problems than 1 hair in a brush of 100, there is less support from the hairs around it, so if it comes out of place, that tip is going to go much faster.

Think back to the last time you edge highlighted a model with your fine detail brush. How long did that take? In particular, how much time of that was spent going back to your palette to reload the brush, only to paint a few millimetres of line before having to go back and reload again? Wouldn't it be great if you could paint a whole panel with one trip to the palette? Well if you didn't use such a small brush then maybe you could!

To be clear, I am 100% guilty of this, and part of the motivation for this article was the fact that I simply didn't believe the loss of control was worth the time saving. But let me really drive home the point again (pun intended) *your new brush will have a good tip*. When it comes to painting, its not just what you can paint with the brush, but how. The tip is not the only important part of the brush that affects performance. I won't go in detail here, as its something that can easily be searched online, but the belly of the brush counts too.

## Get in ma belleh
There are two main traits that affect the belly of a brush, and therefore how much paint it can hold: the length of the hairs (i.e. distance from ferrule to tip) and the width of the ferrule (how many hairs are actually in the brush). These obviously also have affects on other attributes such as the 'snap' of the brush, but these are very much down to personal preference so will take some experimentation.

Because a larger brush is holds more paint, your brush won't dry out as fast. In and of itself that will save you time through reloading the brush, but more so it will improve the end result, as the wet paint will flow off the brush better, giving you a smoother line and sharper highlight with less wobble. Keep you super fine detail brushes for the very finest of details - things like dots of white for specular reflections in gems, or highlighting corners where the light catches a very small area in a much lighter way that the rest of the edge.

## But What Should I Get?
As I said before, I have been using the Raphael 8404, and recently got the Artis Opus brushes which are great, leave a comment if you are interested in a more in depth review of those. Other premium brush brands to check out are Winsor & Newton series 7, Da Vinci Maestro and Rosemary & Co. There are plenty of reviews and assessments out there that cover the differences between these brushes and I won't go into detail about them here.

If you are on a budget there is much worse you can do than Army Painter and GW brushes. But as I said, make sure to replace the regularly. I'm the sort of person that is generally hesitant in trying out new things, and new brushes are definitely one of these things. If you're like me and maybe don't want to dump a lot of money on several brushes at once when you don't know if you will like them, just buy 1, try it out for a few months until it needs replacing and then try something new. Possibly the one piece of advice I wish I had sooner to give me the confidence to give it a go is that the quality of painting I can achieve with my Raphael size 1 is the same as that which I can achieve with the Artis Opus size 1. Sure I have a preference, which I now know is the Raphael just because it is a slightly longer brush *but they both have a good tip* and so I can paint whole models which have been base-coated appropriately with just that one brush if I need to.

## Wash Your Brushes You Detty Pig
Your brush will need replacing eventually, the only other certainties in life are death and taxes. However, you can hold off the inevitable with good brush care and these simple quick tips.

1. Only load the front two-thirds of the brush. Keep paint away from the ferrule and it will stop pigment getting between the bristles and forcing that crisp tip apart.

2. Use brush soap. Master's brush soap is the market leader for a reason, but Artis Opus also provide brush soap with each of there brush sets which work just as well. At the end of the day Kolinsky sable is hair, and like any other hair can be conditioned. Heck, I even read somewhere people using proper hair conditioner on their brushes when they were short! This keeps the bristles soft and flexible, again maintaining that point. It also helps breath new life into old brushes - including those 9 year-old 'Eavy Metal brushes I mentioned earlier!

3. For tough paint, isopropyl alcohol (aka mineral spirits) will lift any paint off in seconds. Be sure to make sure you condition the brushes afterwards though as it will remove a lot of the natural oils and minerals in the hairs. Its also great and cleaning up paint spillages on anything, so would always recommend having some to hand.

4. Store your brushes sideways or downwards. I knew this one for far too long and never did it because my GW paint station has brush holders which are upright. However, what I never had explained to me is the reasoning behind this tip - you will never get your the brush completely green, and there will be water in the brush even after you dry it. If you store the brush upright the water will seap down into the ferrule, and like point 1, it will soften the binding of the hairs and force the tip apart. Sam Lenz with Tabletop Minions, had an [excellent piece of advice](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5vfJdCimmKA&ab_channel=TabletopMinions) regarding brush storage, and that is to put a rubber band or hair band around your water pot, then when you aren't using a brush you can store it tip down with the band holding it against the water pot.

5. Sheath your brushes. Keep your little plastic tubes that come with the brushes, they stop the bristles getting mashed up when you are storing them.